README.md, before:

# Console

Web client to the [Control Plane API](https://github.com/oxidecomputer/omicron).

![screenshot of instances list page](docs/readme-screenshot.png)

## Architecture

![](docs/architecture-browser-only.svg)

In order to avoid the complexity of server-side rendering (and running JS on the rack in general), the web console is a fully client-side React app. We use Vite (which uses Rollup internally for production builds) to build a set of assets (`index.html`, JS bundles, CSS, fonts, images) and we serve those assets as static files from a special set of console endpoints in Nexus. From the control plane's point of view, the web console simply is:

- a tarball of static assets + endpoints that serve them
- a few other endpoints to handle auth actions like login/logout
- a table of sessions (console-specific in practice, but not intrinsically so)

The web console has no special privileges as an API consumer. We log in (which sets a cookie) and make cookie-authed API requests after that. See [RFD 223 Web Console Architecture](https://rfd.shared.oxide.computer/rfd/0223) for a more detailed discussion. The endpoints live in [`nexus/src/external_api/console_api.rs`](https://github.com/oxidecomputer/omicron/blob/c3048a1b43b046c284432eba34d0bc1933de4d56/nexus/src/external_api/console_api.rs) in Omicron.

## Tech

- [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) + [React](https://reactjs.org/) (+ [React Router](https://reactrouter.com/), [React Query](https://tanstack.com/query/latest/), [React Table](https://tanstack.com/table/v8/))
- [Vite](https://vitejs.dev/) for dev server and browser bundling
- [Tailwind](https://tailwindcss.com/) for styling
- [oxide.ts](https://github.com/oxidecomputer/oxide.ts) generates an API client from [Nexus's OpenAPI spec](https://github.com/oxidecomputer/omicron/blob/main/openapi/nexus.json)
- Testing
  - [Mock Service Workers](https://mswjs.io/) for mock API server
  - [Vitest](https://vitest.dev/) for unit tests
  - [Playwright](https://playwright.dev/) for E2E browser tests
- [Ladle](https://ladle.dev/), a lightweight Storybook clone based on Vite

## Directory structure

The app is in [`app`](app). You can see the route structure in [`app/routes.tsx`](app/routes.tsx). In [`libs`](libs) we have a [`ui`](libs/ui) dir where the low-level components live (and the Storybook definition) and an [`api`](libs/api) dir where we keep the generated API client and a React Query wrapper for it. These directories are aliased in [`tsconfig.json`](tsconfig.json) for easy import from the main app as `@oxide/ui` and `@oxide/api`, respectively.

## Try it locally

The fastest way to see the console in action is to check out the repo, run `npm install && npm start`, and go to http://localhost:4000 in the browser. This runs the console with a mock API server that runs in a [Service Worker](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Service_Worker_API).

## Development

### Install dependencies

```
npm install
```

### Run Vite dev server + [MSW](https://mswjs.io/) mock API

This is the way we do most console development. Just run:

```
npm start
```

and navigate to http://localhost:4000 in the browser. The running app will automatically update when you write a source file. This mode uses Mock Service Workers to run a mock API right the browser. This mock API is also used in tests.

### Run Vite dev server against local Nexus API

You can also run the console dev server locally with the mock server off, instead passing requests through to `localhost:12220`. Run `npm run start:nexus` and navigate to http://localhost:4000/login/test-suite-silo/local in the browser. It will not work unless Nexus is running at `localhost:12220`, which is the default for `omicron-dev` (see [Running Omicron (Simulated)](https://github.com/oxidecomputer/omicron/blob/main/docs/how-to-run-simulated.adoc) for how to set that up).

One way to run everything is to use the `tools/start_api.sh` script, which uses tmux to run multiple processes in different panes and automatically populates some fake data (see [`tools/populate_omicron_data.sh`](tools/populate_omicron_data.sh) to see exactly what). From the omicron directory, run `tools/start_api.sh`. Since we're assuming `console` and `omicron` are next to each other, that looks like this:

```sh
../console/tools/start_api.sh
```

<details>
<summary>Configuring tmux</summary

Because running the API requires running two programs plus the populate data script, we use tmux to split the terminal into panes so we can see the log output of all three. tmux has its own complicated set of [keyboard shortcuts](https://tmuxcheatsheet.com/). A good way to avoid having to deal with that if you want to poke around in the server logs is to create `~/.tmux.conf` that looks like this:

```
set -g mouse on
```

This will let you click to focus a pane and scrolling output with the mouse will automatically work. If you do want to use the shortcuts, here's a `tmux.conf` to make it a little more vim-like:

```shell
# change leader key from ctrl-b to ctrl-a
unbind C-b
set-option -g prefix C-a
bind-key C-a send-prefix

# ctrl-a v makes a vertical split, ctrl-a h make a horizontal split
bind v split-window -h
bind s split-window -v
unbind '"'
unbind %

# ctrl-a h/j/k/l move between panes
bind h select-pane -L
bind j select-pane -D
bind k select-pane -U
bind l select-pane -R

set -g mouse on
```

</details>

### Run local dev server against the dogfood rack

1. Get on the VPN
1. Download the TLS key and cert files as indicated in the [dogfood
   doc](https://github.com/oxidecomputer/meta/blob/master/engineering/dogfood.adoc#56-tls-certificates)
   and put them at `dogfood-tls-key.pem` and `dogfood-tls-cert.pem` in the
   **parent** dir of the console repo.
1. Run `npm run start:dogfood`
1. Go to https://localhost:4000 (note the https). The page won't work yet, and you'll get redirected to `/login`, which will look like a 404
1. Go to https://oxide.sys.rack2.eng.oxide.computer in another tab and log in
1. Open the dev tools Storage tab and copy the `session` cookie value, which should look like `d9b1a96e151092eb0ea08b1a0d8c4788441f1894`
1. Go back to your localhost tab, open the developer console, and run
   ```js
   document.cookie = 'session=d9b1a96e151092eb0ea08b1a0d8c4788441f1894'
   ```
1. Go to https://localhost:4000 again

### Run [Ladle](https://ladle.dev/)

```
npm run storybook
```

This will start a preview environment for the UI components in the project. The window should open automatically, but if not go to `http://localhost:61000`.

### E2E tests with [Playwright](https://playwright.dev/)

Playwright tests match the filename pattern `.e2e.ts`. The basic command to run all tests is `npm run e2e`. You may have to run `npx playwright install` after `npm install` to get the browser binaries.

`npm run e2e` runs the tests in Chrome, Firefox, and Safari. `npm run e2ec` is a shortcut for `playwright test --project=chrome`, which runs the tests in Chrome only (the fastest one, useful for local dev). The tests virtually never fail in one browser if they pass in others, except for flakes. Playwright has an excellent [UI mode](https://playwright.dev/docs/test-ui-mode) for running and debugging tests that you can get to by running `npm run e2e -- --ui`.

To debug end-to-end failures on CI checkout the branch with the failure and run `./tools/debug-ci-e2e-fail.sh`. It'll download the latest failures from CI and allow you to open a [playwright trace](https://playwright.dev/docs/trace-viewer-intro#viewing-the-trace) of the failure.

### Other useful commands

| Command                  | Description                                                                        |
| ------------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `npm test run`           | Vitest tests                                                                       |
| `npm test`               | Vitest tests in watch mode                                                         |
| `npm run e2ec`           | Only run end-to-end tests in chrome                                                |
| `npm run lint`           | ESLint                                                                             |
| `npx tsc`                | Check types                                                                        |
| `npm run ci`             | Lint, tests, and types                                                             |
| `npm run fmt`            | Format everything. Rarely necessary thanks to editor integration                   |
| `npm run gen-api`        | Generate API client (see [`docs/update-pinned-api.md`](docs/update-pinned-api.md)) |
| `npm run start:mock-api` | Serve mock API on port 12220                                                       |

## Relevant documents

### RFDs

- [RFD 4 User-Facing API](https://rfd.shared.oxide.computer/rfd/0004)
- [RFD 43 Identity and Access Management (IAM)](https://rfd.shared.oxide.computer/rfd/0043)
- [RFD 44 Hierarchy and API for User Management and Organizations](https://rfd.shared.oxide.computer/rfd/0044)
- [RFD 156 API Requirements for Console Prototype](https://rfd.shared.oxide.computer/rfd/0156)
- [RFD 169 Console Authentication and Session Management](https://rfd.shared.oxide.computer/rfd/0169)
- [RFD 180 Console v1 Scope](https://rfd.shared.oxide.computer/rfd/0180)
- [RFD 223 Web Console Architecture](https://rfd.shared.oxide.computer/rfd/0223)

### Figma

- [Component Library](https://www.figma.com/file/D5ukCJbedrlGkUIh0E6QtX/Component-Library)
- [Applied UI Exploration](https://www.figma.com/file/UDMGwny0LIyMUI9d35XVGl/Applied-UI-Exploration)

Commit message:

document how to specify user in readme

README.md, after:

# Console

Web client to the [Control Plane API](https://github.com/oxidecomputer/omicron).

![screenshot of instances list page](docs/readme-screenshot.png)

## Architecture

![](docs/architecture-browser-only.svg)

In order to avoid the complexity of server-side rendering (and running JS on the rack in general), the web console is a fully client-side React app. We use Vite (which uses Rollup internally for production builds) to build a set of assets (`index.html`, JS bundles, CSS, fonts, images) and we serve those assets as static files from a special set of console endpoints in Nexus. From the control plane's point of view, the web console simply is:

- a tarball of static assets + endpoints that serve them
- a few other endpoints to handle auth actions like login/logout
- a table of sessions (console-specific in practice, but not intrinsically so)

The web console has no special privileges as an API consumer. We log in (which sets a cookie) and make cookie-authed API requests after that. See [RFD 223 Web Console Architecture](https://rfd.shared.oxide.computer/rfd/0223) for a more detailed discussion. The endpoints live in [`nexus/src/external_api/console_api.rs`](https://github.com/oxidecomputer/omicron/blob/c3048a1b43b046c284432eba34d0bc1933de4d56/nexus/src/external_api/console_api.rs) in Omicron.

## Tech

- [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/) + [React](https://reactjs.org/) (+ [React Router](https://reactrouter.com/), [React Query](https://tanstack.com/query/latest/), [React Table](https://tanstack.com/table/v8/))
- [Vite](https://vitejs.dev/) for dev server and browser bundling
- [Tailwind](https://tailwindcss.com/) for styling
- [oxide.ts](https://github.com/oxidecomputer/oxide.ts) generates an API client from [Nexus's OpenAPI spec](https://github.com/oxidecomputer/omicron/blob/main/openapi/nexus.json)
- Testing
  - [Mock Service Workers](https://mswjs.io/) for mock API server
  - [Vitest](https://vitest.dev/) for unit tests
  - [Playwright](https://playwright.dev/) for E2E browser tests
- [Ladle](https://ladle.dev/), a lightweight Storybook clone based on Vite

## Directory structure

The app is in [`app`](app). You can see the route structure in [`app/routes.tsx`](app/routes.tsx). In [`libs`](libs) we have a [`ui`](libs/ui) dir where the low-level components live (and the Storybook definition) and an [`api`](libs/api) dir where we keep the generated API client and a React Query wrapper for it. These directories are aliased in [`tsconfig.json`](tsconfig.json) for easy import from the main app as `@oxide/ui` and `@oxide/api`, respectively.

## Try it locally

The fastest way to see the console in action is to check out the repo, run `npm install && npm start`, and go to http://localhost:4000 in the browser. This runs the console with a mock API server that runs in a [Service Worker](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Service_Worker_API).

## Development

### Install dependencies

```
npm install
```

### Run Vite dev server + [MSW](https://mswjs.io/) mock API

This is the way we do most console development. Just run:

```
npm start
```

and navigate to http://localhost:4000 in the browser. The running app will automatically update when you write a source file. This mode uses Mock Service Workers to run a mock API right the browser. This mock API is also used in tests.

#### Specifying non-default user

Pick a user from the list of users in
[`libs/api-mocks/user.ts`](/libs/api-mocks/user.ts). The one without fleet
viewer permissions is `Hans Jonas`. Open the browser console and run:

```js
document.cookie = 'msw-user=Hans Jonas;domain=localhost;path=/'
```

You are now user Hans Jonas. To go back to the default, delete the cookie. (We will get the mock API to clear the cookie for you on logout soon.)

### Run Vite dev server against local Nexus API

You can also run the console dev server locally with the mock server off, instead passing requests through to `localhost:12220`. Run `npm run start:nexus` and navigate to http://localhost:4000/login/test-suite-silo/local in the browser. It will not work unless Nexus is running at `localhost:12220`, which is the default for `omicron-dev` (see [Running Omicron (Simulated)](https://github.com/oxidecomputer/omicron/blob/main/docs/how-to-run-simulated.adoc) for how to set that up).

One way to run everything is to use the `tools/start_api.sh` script, which uses tmux to run multiple processes in different panes and automatically populates some fake data (see [`tools/populate_omicron_data.sh`](tools/populate_omicron_data.sh) to see exactly what). From the omicron directory, run `tools/start_api.sh`. Since we're assuming `console` and `omicron` are next to each other, that looks like this:

```sh
../console/tools/start_api.sh
```

<details>
<summary>Configuring tmux</summary

Because running the API requires running two programs plus the populate data script, we use tmux to split the terminal into panes so we can see the log output of all three. tmux has its own complicated set of [keyboard shortcuts](https://tmuxcheatsheet.com/). A good way to avoid having to deal with that if you want to poke around in the server logs is to create `~/.tmux.conf` that looks like this:

```
set -g mouse on
```

This will let you click to focus a pane and scrolling output with the mouse will automatically work. If you do want to use the shortcuts, here's a `tmux.conf` to make it a little more vim-like:

```shell
# change leader key from ctrl-b to ctrl-a
unbind C-b
set-option -g prefix C-a
bind-key C-a send-prefix

# ctrl-a v makes a vertical split, ctrl-a h make a horizontal split
bind v split-window -h
bind s split-window -v
unbind '"'
unbind %

# ctrl-a h/j/k/l move between panes
bind h select-pane -L
bind j select-pane -D
bind k select-pane -U
bind l select-pane -R

set -g mouse on
```

</details>

### Run local dev server against the dogfood rack

1. Get on the VPN
1. Download the TLS key and cert files as indicated in the [dogfood
   doc](https://github.com/oxidecomputer/meta/blob/master/engineering/dogfood.adoc#56-tls-certificates)
   and put them at `dogfood-tls-key.pem` and `dogfood-tls-cert.pem` in the
   **parent** dir of the console repo.
1. Run `npm run start:dogfood`
1. Go to https://localhost:4000 (note the https). The page won't work yet, and you'll get redirected to `/login`, which will look like a 404
1. Go to https://oxide.sys.rack2.eng.oxide.computer in another tab and log in
1. Open the dev tools Storage tab and copy the `session` cookie value, which should look like `d9b1a96e151092eb0ea08b1a0d8c4788441f1894`
1. Go back to your localhost tab, open the developer console, and run

```js
document.cookie = 'session=d9b1a96e151092eb0ea08b1a0d8c4788441f1894;domain=localhost;path=/'
```

Go to https://localhost:4000 again and you should be logged in.

### Run [Ladle](https://ladle.dev/)

```
npm run storybook
```

This will start a preview environment for the UI components in the project. The window should open automatically, but if not go to `http://localhost:61000`.

### E2E tests with [Playwright](https://playwright.dev/)

Playwright tests match the filename pattern `.e2e.ts`. The basic command to run all tests is `npm run e2e`. You may have to run `npx playwright install` after `npm install` to get the browser binaries.

`npm run e2e` runs the tests in Chrome, Firefox, and Safari. `npm run e2ec` is a shortcut for `playwright test --project=chrome`, which runs the tests in Chrome only (the fastest one, useful for local dev). The tests virtually never fail in one browser if they pass in others, except for flakes. Playwright has an excellent [UI mode](https://playwright.dev/docs/test-ui-mode) for running and debugging tests that you can get to by running `npm run e2e -- --ui`.

To debug end-to-end failures on CI checkout the branch with the failure and run `./tools/debug-ci-e2e-fail.sh`. It'll download the latest failures from CI and allow you to open a [playwright trace](https://playwright.dev/docs/trace-viewer-intro#viewing-the-trace) of the failure.

### Other useful commands

| Command                  | Description                                                                        |
| ------------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `npm test run`           | Vitest tests                                                                       |
| `npm test`               | Vitest tests in watch mode                                                         |
| `npm run e2ec`           | Only run end-to-end tests in chrome                                                |
| `npm run lint`           | ESLint                                                                             |
| `npx tsc`                | Check types                                                                        |
| `npm run ci`             | Lint, tests, and types                                                             |
| `npm run fmt`            | Format everything. Rarely necessary thanks to editor integration                   |
| `npm run gen-api`        | Generate API client (see [`docs/update-pinned-api.md`](docs/update-pinned-api.md)) |
| `npm run start:mock-api` | Serve mock API on port 12220                                                       |

## Relevant documents

### RFDs

- [RFD 4 User-Facing API](https://rfd.shared.oxide.computer/rfd/0004)
- [RFD 43 Identity and Access Management (IAM)](https://rfd.shared.oxide.computer/rfd/0043)
- [RFD 44 Hierarchy and API for User Management and Organizations](https://rfd.shared.oxide.computer/rfd/0044)
- [RFD 156 API Requirements for Console Prototype](https://rfd.shared.oxide.computer/rfd/0156)
- [RFD 169 Console Authentication and Session Management](https://rfd.shared.oxide.computer/rfd/0169)
- [RFD 180 Console v1 Scope](https://rfd.shared.oxide.computer/rfd/0180)
- [RFD 223 Web Console Architecture](https://rfd.shared.oxide.computer/rfd/0223)

### Figma

- [Component Library](https://www.figma.com/file/D5ukCJbedrlGkUIh0E6QtX/Component-Library)
- [Applied UI Exploration](https://www.figma.com/file/UDMGwny0LIyMUI9d35XVGl/Applied-UI-Exploration)
